---
layout: post
title: Building This Site
category: programming
tags: programming jekyll ruby stevevalaitiscom blog github-pages compass livereload design foundation responsive prose
---
After putting it off for so long, I finally decided to join the early 2000s and put
up a personal site for myself. With that decision came the question of what to
build the site with. I settled on [Jekyll][jekyllrb] for generating the site,
[Foundation][foundation] for the design framework, and [Github Pages][gh-pages]
for hosting the site.
!--more--

### Site Generation
I was fairly certain I wanted to stay with something Ruby based. This counted
out Wordpress, but I didn't necessarily want to build the site with Rails
either. I've heard the name Jekyll tossed out numerous times, along with praises
of its static site generation and being blog-aware. This seemed like it would be
a great fit. The site was to be simple, mostly a blog with just a couple other
static pages.

Jekyll was at times frustrating, especially when trying to extend it. For the
most part it was okay though. It just took coming to terms with the way Jekyll
works versus typical dynamic site development with something like Rails or
Sinatra. Finding answers to questions online was at times difficult as many of
the top results were for old blog posts, or Stack Overflow questions, and Jekyll
may or may have not changed in that time.

My one big irritation with Jekyll was that for something that is supposed to be
blog aware, why on Earth doesn't it generate category and tag pages? It knows
about tags and categories, but doesn't do anything with them besides that.

I wanted to initially use [Slim][slim] for all my templates. Unfortunately I
quickly ran into some issues when trying to nest include some templates. This
was due to Slim being whitespace sensitive and the rendered templates containing
newlines and whitespacing that didn't match with the current indentation level.
I may go back to this in the future and see if changing the Slim rendering
options will allow me to use it everywhere, but for now I just went with a mix
of Slim and HTML.

I had to use [SCSS][sass] for my CSS, because, well basically if you somehow
don't know what SCSS is by now you really need to go the site and look, as
you're really missing out. I currently compile the SCSS files with
[Compass][compass].

In the future I may replace the individual gems and processes for asset
management with the [jekyll-asset-pipeline][jekyll-asset-pipeline] gem, which I
didn't come across until I was almost finished with the site.

### Design
I knew for the design that I wanted to make a site that was responsive. Go ahead
and view this site on your phone, and desktop. It's all the same markup, but
displays differently in each. 

My CSS framework of choice is [Zurb's Foundation 4][foundation]. The defaults are
pretty good, and it makes it easy to build a nice responsive site pretty
quickly. Even though I think you can get a nicer looking site out of the box
with Bootstrap, I really like that Foundation is built with SCSS. This allows me
to use `@include` and `@extend` statements in a way that doesn't involve
plastering Foundation classes all over my markup.

There's a little bit of [Font Awesome][fontawesome] for some of the icons around
the site. Icon fonts are pretty cool, my only frustration with Font Awesome is
having to add specific class in my markup. I would much rather have my own
semantic class names. 

It's not directly part of the site itself, but I run [LiveReload][livereload].
It's a huge timesaver, and makes the design process so much less tedious. It
removes the need to refresh the browser every time a styling change is made.

### Hosting
Since the site is all static HTML pages, I didn't want to even bother with
hosting myself, and having to worry about server crashes, outages, etc... As
such, I decided to host the site using [Github Pages][gh-pages]. I'm using
custom plugins and code with Jekyll, so I can't take advantage of the automated
site generation offered with Pages. It's not too big of an issue though, I just
deploy the site using a simple [shell script][deploysh].

### What's Next
As much as I love Vim, writing posts in it can be a little bit of a pain. Plus, 
sometimes I'm not at my primary machine, or have a development environment
present. Currently this means I can't write a post, because I have no way to
publish it. 

To alleviate this problem and give myself a web based editor for my posts, I'm
going to use [Prose][prose]. Then I'll setup [jekyll-hook][jekyll-hook] on a
development server to receive a post-commit hook from Github and redeploy my
site.

[compass]: http://compass-style.org
[deploysh]: https://github.com/dnd/stevevalaitiscom/blob/master/deploy.sh
[fontawesome]: http://fontawesome.io
[jekyllrb]: http://jekyllrb.com
[jekyll-asset-pipeline]: https://github.com/matthodan/jekyll-asset-pipeline
[jekyll-hook]: https://github.com/developmentseed/jekyll-hook
[foundation]: http://foundation.zurb.com
[gh-pages]: http://pages.github.com
[livereload]: http://livereload.com
[prose]: http://prose.io
[sass]: http://sass-lang.com
[slim]: http://slim-lang.com
